Once around, Westerland one. Westerland
one is a massive star cluster in the
constellation of Ara. Described as a
young superstar cluster, 13,800
light years away towards Ara in the
southern hemisphere in towards the
uh regions of the galaxy closer to the
center about halfway between us and the
center. And it's the most massive
cluster in the Milky Way. Uh first
located by Bankerland in 1961.
And I just love this picture on the
right hand side here uh showing the
amazing stars within the cluster.
When we look at it and we analyze all
those stars, what we find is that there
are some real powerhouses. There are six
yellow hyper giants, quite unusual. Four
red super giants, including Westerland
1-26,
one of the largest stars we've ever
seen. 24 Wolf Ray stars that have
blasted away their outer hydrogen
envelope, exposing the deeper helium
layers, a luminous blue variable, but
start that's a star in transition. Uh,
very rare indeed. And many many of the
giants and super giants in the O and B
class of ordinary main sequence stars
still burning furiously their hydrogen
to helium
and one extremely unusual super giant
Westerland 1-9 which we will talk about
in more detail.
All the stars are the same age. The
cluster formed in one go around four to
five million years ago and they're all
therefore made of the same original
cloud of material. Their compositions
are identical. So quite a burst of star
formation packed together into this
supercluster.
And being so tightly packed and with
nature finding it it easy to make small
stars and hard to make large ones. This
must have been very dense indeed and as
such a lot of smaller stars were created
and captured into binary orbits. We
detect that the vast majority of the
large stars in Westerland one are binary
or multiple systems. Some by direct
observation, some by variations in their
brightness, eclipsing binaries where one
star passes regularly in front of the
other. The radial Doppler shift of their
spectral lines reveals their orbits from
time to time. So, we can see them that
way. And there are other ways of
determining that a star is probably a
binary. You can see X-rays and excesses
of infrared light in binary systems
where the stellar wind coming away from
the two components collides between the
two of them and gets highly energized in
shock fronts that re re uh releases
additional infrared radiation and
X-rays. So we can detect them that way
as well. 70% of the Wolf Ray stars are
binaries. um and 40% of the ordinary O
andB super giants as well. So the larger
they are, the more we seem to be finding
binaries.
This picture here reveals something
about this stellar winds in the cluster.
This was taken with ALMA, the Atakama
large millimeter array. So it's actually
millimeter wave astronomy, not optical.
But what it has shown is the gas that's
creating cometlike stars with tails
where the stellar wind from one star is
blowing material that's ejected from
another off in an asymmetric pattern. So
quite amazing to see the star tails
interacting with each other.
So
interestingly in Westerland one I we
have
young stars less than four to five
million years old and very many large
ones and these y large stars should have
begun to explode.
We should in the last million years or
so have seen one every 10,000 years
detonating as supernovi. So a hundred
events. But we can only find one inside
the cluster that is clearly the remnant
of a supernova and that is the
Westerland one magnetar.
It's got a catalog designation CXO
J164710.20.
20-455217.
So we're going to call it the magnetar
discovered by X-ray observations using
the Chandra telescope in 2005.
So we have a an ESO optical infrared
image of Westerland one on the left and
then Chandra zooming in on it with
X-rays showing all that hot gas in blue
there around the cluster. No surprise
that there should be so much of that.
But one of the objects glowing very
brightly towards the outskirts
of the cluster is this magnetar.
It's a neutron star spinning every 10
and 61 seconds, emitting bursts of radio
waves and bursts of X-rays. So, an X-ray
pulsar. Absolutely astonishingly violent
object, but spinning quite slowly. Many
spinning neutron stars, pulsars spin
hundreds or even a thousand times a
second. This takes 10 seconds to go
around. So it is rather unusual and it's
likely that this formed from a very very
massive star at the end of its life. Now
to have had a short life like this and
to have already gone supernova, it
probably began with more than 40 solar
masses. Stars of that mass would have a
lifespan of less than four million years
and we would see them in the uh post
stellar stage, the collapsar stage as a
neutron star or more likely as a black
hole because anything over about 25
solar masses should have collapsed all
the way to a black hole, not a neutron
star. So it seems likely that this star
went through an evolutionary process
where it began at that enormous mass but
ejected a lot of its envelope around it
and maybe that material is still
surrounding the star itself.
Now the Swift satellite spotted a gamma
ray burst from this region as well.
20 millisecond burst of gamma rays and
very fortuitously
the XMM Newton telescope X-ray telescope
had been observing that uh that area
just a few days prior to the 21st of
September and this GRB and it was able
to determine that the magnetar was the
source seeing that the X-ray brightness
rose by a factor of a 100 during this
outburst, the gammaray burst. So
something very very interesting going on
there. Uh maybe this uh magnetar finally
had enough mass fall back upon it to tip
it over the limit of the maximum mass
for a neutron star and collapse down to
a black hole with an enormous burst of
gamma rays and x-rays. Uh we're still
following this one up.
Now it is interesting though that that
is the only event that we have found.
There should be at least a hundred other
of these supernovi in Westerland one or
the remains of them and we just can't
find them. So something strange is going
on. Suggestions are black hole formation
directly that supernovi have kicked the
remnant stars out of the cluster. um in
these all these binaries, if one of them
explodes, the other one could end up
with all of the momentum and get hurled
away. So maybe they're no longer in the
center of the cluster, but we just don't
know. Now, I did mention that we would
talk about Westland 1-9,
the most unusual star in the group. And
this has a classification
uh it's a B type star
subclass brackets E with SG for super
giant on the front.
So a very massive star somewhere in the
range 20 to 50 solar masses 30,000
degrees Kelvin but very very odd
features about it. bright radio
transmissions coming from it. Excesses
of infrared hard X-rays all pouring away
from this star.
Now the be class of stars, these are
unusual blue white massive stars. And
the Bclass refers to
main sequence stars that are very
massive but not quite as massive as the
Oclass or indeed the Wclass Wolf Rayats.
So we're we're talking sort of 20 30
solar masses something like that um
depending on exactly how bright they are
and how massive they are. But the
brackets e brackets sub class refers to
the presence of unusual features in the
spectrum so-called forbidden line trans
uh uh forms in the uh emission spectrum
from oxygen, sulfur, iron, nickel and
many other elements. Um and it's unusual
to see these in the outer envelope of
stars. So w
D1-9
is a super giant version of a be star SG
be brackets E very very rare indeed and
one of the few examples. Now what we
think is going on is that the star
itself is trapped inside a huge dust
cocoon which has been ejected
probably from the star itself in a
previous outburst or large outflow of
material. And the question really is can
we confirm this? Can we see what's going
on inside? And this is where we need the
Chandra X-ray telescope to put on our
X-ray specs and have a look inside the
uh central region of WD1-9.
And here's Chandra's image of the star
with this clumpy material around it
suggesting that we are on the right
track and that there is a cocoon of
previous ejector responsible for uh the
shrouding of the main star itself making
it appear dimmer than we thought and
also uh creating some of the emissions
that we've detected.
Now, Chandra was able to see that the
spectrum of the star varied and that
there was a periodic signal in
brightness,
each of which were varying with a period
of around just over 14 days. And you can
see the uh phase diagram showing that
oscillation and uh the distribution of
the uh x-ray periods that could be
derived from the signal there suggesting
that this is a binary with a 14 day long
orbit. So there are two stars going
around each other inside the cocoon of
material. And this leads to a number of
possibilities.
One is that there has been a stellar
merger that two stars have collided with
each other as shown in the top image and
that a lot of material got transferred
from one to the other perhaps creating
the very unusual signature spectrum and
a lot of material ejected. or perhaps
that one of the stars is an highly
evolved red super giant and that
material is being torn away from it to
fall into the gravity of its larger
neighbor.
Now the X-ray search continued and this
showed us that we have iron present in
this central region. Now, that's unusual
because iron is usually formed inside
the core of stars that have exploded and
doesn't escape into the outer layers
until after a supernova blows the star
apart. But we're definitely detecting
the emission lines in the X-ray spectrum
of iron. Uh it indicates that there is a
lot going on and perhaps the hot plasma
from colliding stellar winds is
responsible for a lot of the X-rays that
we're seeing indicating that that
material contains iron.
Um now we see this in other Wolf Ray
stars as well that have ejected material
but it all points to a previous
supernova having created the envelope in
the first place.
Now when we look at the cluster in terms
of very very high energies, we're
talking cosmic ray detectors and gamma
ray detectors. Now what we see is that
the central part of the cluster up at
the top there where the little
five-pointed star is is a source for
terra electron volt radiation. Very very
high energy 10 ^ 12 electron volts per
particle coming from this central
region. So an immensely powerful source
right in the center of the cluster
u with the so-called TEV ring around it.
But then lower down in the picture and
shown in the bright orange colors is
another region where we are getting high
energy gamma rays. And this is 320 light
years away from the main TEV source. And
we think that this is material powered
to glow in gamma rays by an immense
amount of radiation. high energy
electrons hurtling away from whatever
the TEV source is right in the center
and causing the gas to be superheated
and glow um by the electron radiation
that is pouring away as cosmic rays from
the uh central region. So something in
the center there is certainly
accelerating all of these cosmic rays to
very high energy. And this is probably
going to mean that there are undetected
black holes in the center there. Maybe
one intermediate mass black hole perhaps
a thousand solar masses creating an
accretion disc and accelerating
particles to these incredible energies
creating a beam of electrons and other
uh high energy particles that is then
illuminating that cloud of material. So
maybe we are beginning to get onto the
case of detecting some of the mysteries
of the star cluster, super star cluster
Westerland one. And I leave you with the
image of it here just showing what a
spectacular site it really is. Thanks
very much for listening.